# CS50-Final-Project
#### Video Demo:  [video URL](https://youtu.be/qJy7xWYjHRA)
#### Description:
In my final project, I created a website for web-based games and created the first game, 2048. I coded this project outside CS50's IDE in a desktop version of Visual Studio Code and used WSL for the command-line. For the project itself, I used HTML, CSS, Java Script, and Flask. This project gave me a much better understanding of just how much goes into a game like this, because even after knowing a bit about coding, I never would have guessed that the game 2048 was so complex under the hood.

Starting with the project directory, there is a static folder, a templates folder, a venv folder, a .gitignore file, app.py, the database (games.db), requirements.txt, and a license. The static folder contains all the CSS files, the JS file for the 2048 game, and the logo image used in the website's header. The templates folder contains all the HTML files like layout.html and all the files that extend it. When setting up the project, I used a virtual environment, venv, to install the Python packages and stored them in requirements.txt. This helped me set up my project and learn about standard practices, so I can learn to do things the right way and avoid issues with package version issues down the line. Originally, my .gitignore file only had /venv to ignore the virtual environment. Then, a folder called "pycache" was auto-generated and I found out what it is and that I should not be tracking it either. I found Github's Python.gitignore and removed the instances of pycache from my repository.

I enjoyed learning about flask in the previous week, so I wanted to create a website using it as well as create a 2048 game. Eventually, I settled on using flask for the website as a whole and creating the game itself with JS, CSS, and HTML. I'd intended to also implement other games if time allowed, but 2048 proved to be much more complex than I expected. In app.py, I set up the routes for the website Game Time Games. Currently, it has routes to render the home(index), 2048, login, and register pages as well as routes to update the user's high score in 2048 and log a user out. The 2048 route checks for the user's highscore and displays it. The route /update_2048_highscore checks that a user is logged in and stops if none are. If they are, it grabs the user's current score and compares it to the highscore stored in the database. If it's higher, the database is updated, ensuring that as soon as a new highscore is reached, it's saved and displayed to the user. The login and register routes both check that each form was completely filled with valid info, while login also remembers which user is logged in by saving a user_id and register saves the input info into the database. Logout clears the user_id saved in login.

For the HTML, there is a layout.html file, then the files that extend it: 2048.html, index.html, login.html, and register.html. Layout.html covers everything besides main: the boilerplate HTML, head, body, header, and footer. Inside the head, jinja is used to make room for other files to add links to extra CSS and JS, as well as the title of each page. In the header, I included a logo from https://www.vectorstock.com/royalty-free-vector/game-time-joypad-label-vector-50472179, after running it through an online filter that took away the backround and made it a vector. The header also includes the navigation bar, with links to the "home" and "2048" pages, as well as "log in" and "register" if the user is not logged in or just "log out" if they are. There is room for main, the biggest chunk of code that differs page-to-page, and a small footer that includes my name and credit for the logo. Index.html links to home.css and contains the description of the website as a whole. Login.html and register.html contain the forms necessary for those tasks. 2048.html includes a div container for the h2, score and best score containers,  information on how to play, two buttons: continue and new game, and and empty div with the class "grid" for the gameboard to go. Originally, I used W3schools's grid example as a baseline, then changed it as necessary. I was trying to create the 2048 board in my HTML file, but after I was having so much difficulty creating the game board this way, I watched some tutorials and examples to see how other people have implemented this game. Eventually, I found that I should be creating it in Java Script instead. 

For the CSS, there is a main css sheet, styles.css, and three sub-sheets: home.css, 2048.css, and account.css. Styles.css covers the css applied to every page on the website, especially the elements within layout.html. The header includes the logo and word "games" that completes the name of the site. The CSS centers this above the nav bar and sets the correct distance between the two elements. This stylesheet is also responsible for the body color and the navigation bar styling. I liked the styling I used in the homepage pset, so I borrowed most of the styling from there. I did change it so that the account links (log out, log in, register) will be on the right side while the rest are left-aligned. In home.css, I styled the description of the website. I learned how to style a horizontal line across the page. In account.css, I styled the forms the users see when logging in or registering an account. Finally, in 2048.css, I styled the 2048 game. For the grid tiles, I wanted to have a color palette, so stored the colors in variables inside the stylesheet. Doing this taught me how to assign css variables, as I'd never done that before. The game is centered with flex box, and I styled the gameboard and grid tiles to resemble the classic 4x4 2048 board (besides changing the tile colors). The score and best containers are styled as boxes you can easily see inside the div with the class container. The h2 "2048" is also inside that div, allowing the score boxes to be displayed beside it. The "continue" and "new game" buttons are styled the same for consistency. Originally, when I was using a grid to create the gameboard directly inside HTML and CSS, this is where I had styling like `grid-template: repeat(4, 1fr)/repeat(4, 1fr);`. Once I changed it to have and empty div inside the HTML for the grid and fill it with JS, I changed how the css worked as well. Now, the .grid and .grid div sections style the gameboard but I don't need endless CSS for each layer to center and fit together correctly as I did before.

The games.db database has a schema like this:

**users** table

| Column | Type | Description |
| --- | --- | --- |
| id | INTEGER | Primary key, auto-increment |
| username | TEXT | unique password |
| hash | TEXT | password hash |

**scores** table

| Column | Type | Description |
| --- | --- | --- |
| id | INTEGER | Primary key, auto-increment |
| user_id | INTEGER | foreign key to users(id) |
| game | TEXT | name of game |
| highscore | INTEGER | user's highscore for that game |

* scores.user_id references users.id

This database has a users table that holds usernames and password hashes. At first, I was going to have a different table for each game to hold things like highscores, best times, etc., but having a whole table for a game like 2048, where I only want to store the highscore, seemed like it would become way more complex than needed if more games like that were added. So, for highscore-only games, the data is stored in the scores table. Later on, if games like Sudoku are added, they can have their own table (example: Sudoku scores table holds best times for different difficulty levels).

Lastly, the Java Script used to create the 2048 game is in 2048.js. I watched tutorials and read documentation for 2048 game logic to help me create the game, but tried to make it my own. Once I got to checking for game over, I was stuck on some bugs that I couldn't figure out so asked Github Copilot to look it over. It found the reason was that I was handling the logic and trying to manipulate the DOM at the same time. So, when checking for game over, I was trying to make a copy of the board and move the tiles to see if it was possible (if not possible in any direction, game over), but since I wasn't separating the logic from the DOM, it was actually moving tiles and causing those bugs. It helped me make helper functions to separate these two things, as well as better organize (order) my functions into groups. These groups are: board and tile setup, high score tracking, helper functions for board manipulation, helper functions for tile colors and font sizes, pure logic (no DOM) slide and combine functions, game state checks, key movement functions, and event listeners for key presses and controls. The game board is created with a const variable width that's set to 4 for a 4x4 grid, allowing other functions to use the same without a "magic number". This also makes the game scalable, as one could change the const to 5 for a 5x5 grid and the functionality would remain. When the board is created, two random tiles are generated and their colors displayed, as well as resetting variables from any previos game. When any tile is created, it has a 70% chance of being 2, otherwise it's 4. This is because when playing, you get 2s more than 4s. It also assigns colors to tiles based on their values using CSS variables, and adjusts font size for readability and so the text stays within the borders of the tile. For the game logic functions, each direction has a function for slide and one for combine. The logic functions are separated from DOM updates to avoid bugs and use helper functions to convert between board state arrays and tile values, as well as comparing board states for checking for wins and game overs. The score is updated as tiles combine, and highscore is compared and updated as needed within the database and on the screen. If a player wins (by getting 2048) or loses (because there are no moves left), the how-to-play directions's inner HTML is changed to display a "You Win!" or "You Lose!" message, and also pauses the game so the keys aren't being listened for. If it's a win and the player clicks the "continue" button, the game is unpaused. There are also event listeners that look for both arrow key and WASD keyups. I wanted to add a way for lefties (like me) to better play the game. There's also a function that prevents the arrow keys from scrolling through the page when the game is unpaused, because it was really distracting to play with the screen moving around. The "continue" button appears only after a player reaches 2048 and lets them keep playing as opposed to starting a new game if they want. 

